The Russian Academy of Foreign Affairs
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
Let me introduce myself.
I am Sergey Akov.
I am a professor at the Russian Academy of Foreign Affairs,
the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade.
I teach MBA courses at our Academy,
as well as at the Russian Academy of People's Economy.
We will be talking about the problems of micro- and macroeconomics.
Perhaps many of you have already encountered this science,
which can be called in different ways.
It is often referred to as economic theory.
Sometimes the word economy is referred to as economics in English.
So, micro- and macroeconomics are two components of this science.
If you have studied this field before,
you should know that the economic theory
is made up of thick textbooks,
whole volumes.
It is impossible to tell you all their contents.
You probably won't need them.
That is why I decided to focus on the issues
that may be interesting and useful to you,
as well as to practical people.
That is why my course is best referred to as
economics for practical people.
In the West, it is called managerial economics.
Or, to put it simply, management economics.
Please look at the topics we will be covering in this course.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that,
in addition to the lecture course,
you are also offered a fully printed lecture course.
It would be good to read this course.
At the end of each topic, you will find a control task.
It would be good to solve them.
I recommend you pay special attention to the case studies,
that is, to the analysis of practical situations.
And to complete the study of this course,
probably best of all, with the control test.
Well, I wish you success. Let's get started.
So, once again, look.
Our first topic is introduction to economics.
Two questions on this topic.
The first question is economics as a science.
Well, the topic is introductory, I will dwell on it very briefly.
And first of all, I would like to tell you
what kind of science is economics.
Where did it come from? How did it arise?
It arose from a very simple contradiction.
People's needs are limitless,
and the resources they have to meet these needs,
unfortunately, are limited.
And if soon it is so, then there is a problem of choice.
Well, a couple of elementary examples.
Let's say you come to a store.
No matter how rich you are,
the amount of money you have is limited.
But you will not buy only bread or only milk.
What is your task?
You need to buy an optimal set of goods
for the limited amount of money you have.
That is, the set that best satisfies your needs.
That is, you solve a typical economic problem
related to the problem of choice.
Or a company.
The company cannot produce everything.
It also has limited resources.
What is its task?
The best way to use the limited resources
to get the maximum profit.
Local authorities would like to build a school,
a road and a hospital.
But again, there is not enough resources for everything.
Again, you have to choose.
So, this is what economic theory does.
And now, please look at the next slide.
The subject of economics.
That is, what does economics study?
Here we look.
The subject of economics is the decisions made in society
when distributing limited resources
between different options of their use
in order to maximize the well-being of people.
But this is what I have already told you about.
Economic theory is about how people, companies, society as a whole
make their choice in conditions of limited resources.
Let's look further.
The next slide.
If you have to make a choice soon,
you should answer three basic questions.
The first question is what and how much to produce.
The second question is how to produce.
The third question is for whom to produce.
Again, the simplest example.
Local authorities would like to build a school, a road and a hospital.
But again, there is not enough resources for everything.
The first question they have to answer is what to produce.
Okay.
Let's say they chose the road.
But another question comes up.
In fact, the road can be built in different ways.
You can hire a regiment of soldiers with shovels,
or you can use less manual labor and more machines.
What is the point?
The choice of the best production technology.
That is, you have to answer the question how to produce.
Okay.
Let's say we built a road.
The pie is baked.
What should we do next?
We have to divide the pie.
So the question is for whom to produce.
In the application of the road, you can do this.
You can make the road paid or free.
If we make the road free,
we answered the question for whom to produce, for whom the road.
If the road is free, then the road is for everyone.
If it is paid, then it is already a road for those who can pay the required amount.
A compromise option is possible.
The road can be free for the residents of our region and paid for the residents of other regions.
So, these are the three main questions of the economic choice.
And then, look.
I have already said that the economic theory consists of two parts.
Microeconomics and macroeconomics.
What do they study?
Look at the slide.
Microeconomics studies the behavior of individual economic agents
and their interaction in individual markets.
Individual economic agents can be, for example, a separate company or a separate household.
And in the center of microeconomics attention are the prices and volumes of production of individual goods,
the choice of an individual consumer, the release of resources of an individual company, and so on.
Macroeconomics, in turn, studies the people's economy as a whole, as a single system.
And in the center of its attention are the general indicators of public production,
such as GDP, economic growth, unemployment, inflation, and so on.
Let's look at a few simple examples.
Let's say that the company X fired 100 people.
What sphere does this relate to?
Obviously, to the microeconomics. Why?
Because it is about the behavior of a separate enterprise.
In Russia, the level of unemployment has decreased.
In this case, it is about the economy as a whole.
And this issue is related to the macroeconomics.
But if the world oil prices have sharply increased due to the war in the Middle East?
Think about it.
Micro or macro?
In fact, micro.
In fact, microeconomics.
Why?
Because in this case, we are talking about the market of a separate commodity, even a very large market.
The microeconomics studies the markets of separate commodities.
But a separate market is not necessarily a market in our village.
A separate market can be the world market.
For example, the world oil market.
This is a subject of microeconomics.
And a couple of comments on the same subject.
It should not be thought that the microeconomics is engaged in some less important, less significant things.
In fact, everything big is made up of small.
It is impossible to understand how the forest develops if we do not know the laws by which individual trees grow.
And in general, look, the prefix micro literally means small.
But the matter is not in size at all.
The object of microeconomics may be larger than the object of macroeconomics.
The simplest example.
For example, Microsoft.
A separate company.
Its activity is related to the course of microeconomics.
But at the same time, in terms of the volume of the annual release, Microsoft exceeds the head of the internal product, for example, of Luxembourg.
But the economy of Luxembourg is macroeconomics.
The object of macroeconomics.
What happens?
The object of microeconomics, I repeat, may be larger than the object of macroeconomics.
Another comment.
It is not necessary to divide micro and macroeconomics with a single wall.
In fact, they smoothly flow from one to another.
And then look at the next slide.
We will talk about very important things.
About economic costs.
I have already said that the main problem of economic theory is the problem of rational choice.
And if we make a choice soon, the concept of economic costs arises.
This is probably the most important concept in the course of economics.
Therefore, I will dwell on it in more detail.
First, the definition.
At first glance, it may seem difficult to you.
In fact, there is nothing difficult.
I will explain.
Look at the definition.
We read.
Economic costs of obtaining a certain benefit are other benefits that could be obtained with the same resources,
but from which you will have to refuse if the choice is made in favor of this benefit.
I strongly suspect that, firstly, nothing is clear, some three-stage definition.
In fact, let's figure it out.
Let's use your example.
You came to study some science.
Let's say, the same economy.
Tell me, please, answer yourself the question, what are your costs of studying this course?
In fact, we are talking about costs.
Let me explain.
What are your costs of studying economics?
Well, it is quite likely that many of you, first of all, remembered the tuition fee.
In fact, it does not matter how much you pay, but how much you pay.
Of course, the tuition fee is your expenses.
But economists make a certain adjustment.
Look, now the annual course of study at the Moscow University of Economics costs about 7,000 units.
But at the end of the 19th century, the same annual course cost about 30 rubles.
Does it mean that the tuition fee was cheap at that time, and now it has become expensive?
I hope you understand that it is not the case.
So, what do economists say?
Economists say that when you pay money for some benefit, for example, education,
you spend, you lose not the money itself, but some other benefits that you could have acquired for this money.
These unobtained benefits and your losses or your expenses associated with the obtained, considered benefit.
For example, you could study economics, and you could spend this money on vacation.
So, what happens?
If you study economics, you will not be able to relax normally.
These are your losses associated with studying economics.
Someone, instead of studying economics, could buy a new fur coat.
So, the expenses associated with studying this course, the absence of a fur coat, are losses or expenses.
Well, okay.
What else do you lose by studying economics?
In addition to paying for your studies, you also lose time.
But again, not the time itself, but some benefits that you could have acquired, received during this time.
What benefits do you lose?
Each in a different way.
Someone, instead of studying, could work more, earn more money.
So, what goes into the economic costs of education?
The lost salary, or rather the benefits that could have been acquired for this salary.
Someone, instead of studying, could repair an apartment.
According to the alternative costs, what goes into it?
The dissatisfaction of living in an unrepaired, dirty apartment.
Someone, instead of studying, could raise a child.
So, what goes into the alternative costs of education?
An uneducated child.
Someone could just relax.
So, what goes into the alternative costs of education?
The lost pleasure of watching your favorite TV series.
So, what happens?
In order to assess the alternative costs of obtaining this benefit...
I forgot to say, alternative costs and economic costs are synonyms.
In order to assess the alternative costs of obtaining this benefit,
you need to assess all the losses that you incur in this regard.
And then, in order to bring these losses to a common denominator,
the value of these losses, of course, would be desirable to be expressed in monetary units.
Well, I would like to make a couple of comments on alternative costs.
Very important, which must be taken into account.
The first comment.
Alternative costs arise only where there is an alternative.
There is no alternative, there are no alternative or economic costs.
Let's take an example.
I have already said that we are considering a situation when you decide to study some new course.
During the course, you have to spend money on food.
Will the food expenses go into the alternative costs of obtaining education?
No, they will not.
And here is why.
Because you have to eat in any case, regardless of whether you are studying or not.
I repeat again.
Alternative costs arise only where there is an alternative.
If you have to bear expenses, regardless of whether you are studying or not,
then economists do not include these expenses in alternative costs.
Let's take an example.
Here is a road.
It leads from point A to point B.
As it turns out, there are two lanes.
On this side, cars go from A to B.
On this side, cars obviously go from B to A.
You have to get to the car from A to B.
Where will you catch the car?
Which side will you stand on?
Obviously, elementary experience tells you that you will stand somewhere here.
Explain your behavior from the point of view of the theory of alternative costs.
I will say right away that the time to turn from A to B,
if the car goes like this, and you decided to stand here,
we will consider the time to turn to be equal to zero.
Why are you standing here?
Let's discuss.
What do you want?
Obviously, you want to get from A to B as cheaply as possible.
And obviously, you think that the driver will take with you the smaller the amount,
the less his expenses.
So, there is a question.
What are the alternative costs of a driver for transportation?
For transportation, you, from A to B, if he still goes there,
they are equal to zero or close to zero.
Why?
Because if he still goes in this direction,
then neither his time, nor the fuel consumption will be included in the alternative costs for transportation.
He still goes in this direction.
Of course, he will have alternative costs.
But what are they related to?
To the reluctance to have a stranger in the cabin.
Who knows what you will throw there.
But if you are a pretty lady,
I dare to assure you that there are no costs here,
only benefits.
Therefore, a lady's car will probably cost faster than a man's.
And look, what would happen if you caught a car standing here?
Cars go from B to A.
And you need from A to B.
You will turn the car around.
But then the alternative costs of the driver will be much higher.
Then, in the alternative costs of the driver for transportation from A to B,
if he goes from B to A,
all these expenses will be included,
and the lost time,
and the costs of fuel and everything else.
Imagine that here in point A is an international airport,
and the driver is going to fly away to rest abroad.
You will turn him around.
He will not go to the airport, but he will take you to B.
But you will have to pay him a lot.
Because his alternative costs in this case will be very high.
We live in an alternative world.
There are a lot of alternatives.
So, all alternatives at the same time are impossible to implement.
Therefore, when you evaluate alternative costs of getting some benefit,
you need to choose the best alternative.
For example,
let's say,
a certain lady has a choice today.
She has several alternatives for tonight.
Well, what alternatives can there be for tonight?
To rest.
To rest, just stay at home and watch TV.
To meet, for example, with FOMO.
To meet with FOMO.
To meet with EREMA.
To study the economy.
You see, there are four alternatives.
The question is,
what will be included in the alternative costs of rest?
It is impossible to implement everything at the same time.
You can't study both FOMO and EREMA at the same time.
You can't study the economy at the same time.
To evaluate alternative costs of rest,
you need to consider
the value of the best of the other alternatives.
What is obvious?
Of course, it is studying the economy.
So, in this case, alternative costs of rest
will include the lost pleasure of studying the economy.
Well, I hope we have discussed
economic or alternative costs.
But there is another very important concept.
It is important for practice.
Irreversible costs.
Look at the slide, please.
After determining the economic costs,
it is possible to determine irreversible costs.
What is written there?
Irreversible costs are the costs
that were incurred earlier
and that cannot be returned.
Economists do not take such costs into account.
Let's look at an example.
You are on the road.
Here is the starting point.
You have a choice.
To study or not to study.
To make the right choice,
you need to evaluate the benefits and losses,
that is, the costs that you incur in connection with studying.
What benefits do you get from studying?
You probably expect to finish your studies
with a higher salary
or a more successful career.
Someone may simply like to study.
I have met such people.
Let's assume that the benefits of studying
can be estimated in rubles.
Let's assume that if you go to study,
you will get different benefits for 120 rubles.
Good.
But on the other hand,
if you go to study,
you will incur some losses.
What losses?
We have already talked about them.
What will you lose?
A salary.
Maybe.
You will have to pay for your studies.
You will be able to rest less.
All these are your losses,
all these are your costs in connection with studying.
If you did not study,
what would you get?
You would save money for your studies.
You would rest more.
And so on and so forth.
Let's assume that you estimate all this in 100 rubles.
So, if you go to study,
you will get what?
A benefit for 120 rubles.
But you will incur a loss for 100 rubles.
But it is obvious that
the benefits are greater than the costs.
So, you should start studying.
If you think rationally, of course.
Okay.
You started studying,
you paid money,
you just started studying,
and you faced a very unpleasant surprise.
They teach worse than you expected.
What two numbers would you say this is?
Bad studies.
But obviously, the benefits.
If you are taught badly,
what would you get?
You would get a benefit from education
for a smaller amount.
Let's assume that it turned out
that with such quality of education
you would get a benefit only for 80 rubles.
Knowing this in advance,
if you think rationally,
you would not go to study.
But in fact, what is the point?
You get a benefit for how much?
For 80 rubles.
And you incur a loss for 100 rubles.
It is obvious that you should not study.
But there is a nuance.
Let's assume
that out of these 100 rubles of costs,
50 rubles, let's say,
is the fee for education.
And 50 rubles, out of 50 rubles,
you estimate all the other losses.
And let's assume, again,
that according to the terms of the contract,
you pay money at the time of the start of study.
What does this mean?
It means that
when you get to this point,
these 50 rubles that you have already paid
have become irrevocable costs for you.
They will not be compensated for you
under any circumstances.
Even if you continue to study,
even if you quit studying.
What is your alternative now?
When you have already started studying at this point.
Either to continue studying,
or what?
Or to quit studying.
To continue or to quit.
What do you think when you are already at this point?
Yes, I was deceived,
promising better knowledge.
But now,
if I continue studying,
how much will I benefit?
80 rubles.
And what are my costs
in connection with the continuation of my studies?
Alternative costs.
Only 50 rubles.
These 50 rubles
will not be returned to you in any case.
Even if you continue studying,
even if you quit it.
Accordingly, these 50 rubles will go into what?
Into irrevocable costs.
These are no longer alternative costs.
And at this stage,
you should not take them into account.
Economists do not take irrevocable costs into account.
They look ahead.
And here is another example
to make it easier for Louis to understand all this.
You are abroad.
You
bought a yacht tour ticket.
During the tour, you are being photographed.
And the tour has not yet finished,
as the photos are already shown, printed and hanging on the rope.
You were not asked to take a picture.
You are not forced to take a picture and buy it.
You can decide whether to buy it or not.
Photos are expensive.
3 dollars per one.
But ask yourself.
What are the alternative costs of a photographer
at the moment
when all the photos are already shown, I repeat,
printed and hanging on the rope?
What are they equal to?
If you think that they include
the cost of the film,
the cost of the photographer's work,
then you are wrong.
Pay attention.
At the moment when the photos are already made,
the alternative costs of the photographer are zero.
Why?
Because at this moment
he has already incurred all his costs.
And his costs have become irrevocable costs.
His alternative costs, I repeat,
are zero.
And if this is so,
then what line of behavior
would you choose the best?
Of course, to bargain.
But how to do it best?
You need to approach the photographer,
just take a look at him
and say,
dear,
here is a great work,
great photos.
I like these three very much.
What to do?
During this tour
I spent all my money.
I have one dollar left.
You can even open a wallet and show him this dollar.
I understand that this is not good.
But I did not know, dear, what I can do.
I did not know that there would be such magnificent photos.
I spent all my money.
I have only one dollar left.
I like these three photos.
You can put this dollar in front of him,
take the photos.
He will not be satisfied with something,
but he will not chase you.
Why? I repeat again.
What is his alternative at this moment?
What can he do with your photo?
You can be a highly respected member of society,
but still not Julia Roberts and not Michael Jackson.
So what is his alternative?
Either sell you this photo
or just tear it off and throw it away.
So his alternative expenses for using the photo,
in addition to selling it to you,
are equal to zero.
Zero.
He will, of course, scold himself in Turkish.
He will say something like,
you are a bad sheep, at least you have wool and furs.
Knowing in advance that you are such a fruit,
that you will behave like this,
he would not have taken a photo of you at all.
But when the photos are already taken,
his alternative expenses are equal to zero.
All his expenses have become irrevocable costs.
You see, people in business
very often catch each other
on irrevocable costs.
Most often this is not ethical.
But in this case,
my conscience is absolutely clear.
I did not ask him to take a photo of me.
If I had a contract with him,
promised to pay him three dollars for a photo,
and then, when he had already paid all the expenses,
he would say that I have no money.
Here it would be perhaps unethical.
But in this case, I did not ask him
and I do not think that I did something bad.
Well, we have looked at,
disassembled economic costs
and irrevocable costs.
Well, let's summarize this first question.
What, in my opinion, would be very good
to have you in the dry residue?
Once again.
What does economics study?
Decisions that are made in society
about the use of limited resources
to meet unlimited needs.
The main problem of economics
is the problem of choosing
in conditions of limited resources.
If you have to choose soon,
the concept of alternative or economic costs arises.
Economic costs of obtaining this benefit
are those benefits that you had to refuse,
or rather the value of those benefits
that you had to refuse
if you make a choice in favor of this benefit.
And if all the costs are already incurred,
they have become irrevocable costs.
And do not forget, of course,
that economic theory consists of two disciplines,
microeconomics and macroeconomics.
Well, let's go back to the slide of the topic.
You see, there are two questions.
The first one is economics as a science.
The second question is economic circulation.
Well, the first one, I think, is poor and poor.
We have already looked at it.
The second question is very interesting,
but I will leave it to you to study on your own.
You have it in the text of the lecture
with Russian examples.
We just have a little limited time.
We still have a lot to do.
And let's move on to the second topic.
The second topic, please look at the slide,
is called the supply-demand model
and its use in economic analysis.
This topic is very important,
because the supply-demand model
is perhaps the most important,
the most widely used model
in the course of microeconomics.
It explains how prices are formed,
how the proceeds of the sold and purchased goods
are formed in the separately taken markets.
I repeat once again,
it can be both the local market,
the national market,
and even the global market,
but the goods are taken separately.
How is the price formed?
The price is obviously formed depending on what?
On demand and supply.
Therefore, the first question is the demand and its factors.
In the second question, we will focus on supply.
The third question is the market balance.
We will combine demand and supply together
and see how the market price is formed.
And then we can talk a little
about practical applications of theory.
So, look, we start with the first question.
Demand and its factors.
The definition is very simple.
Please look at the slide.
It is quite consistent with the usual
life logic.
We read that demand is called
the quantity of goods that all buyers
can and want to purchase
during this time
and under certain conditions.
It seems to me that there is nothing complicated here.
Well, demand is how many goods we want to purchase.
The moment during which we need to set the time,
and we need to take into account certain conditions.
These conditions are called demand factors.
What are the main factors of demand?
Please look at the slide.
The first factor is the price of a given product.
Well, what is obvious?
It is obvious that the demand for a product depends on its price.
Undoubtedly, I think everyone agrees.
The second factor is the price and quantity of substitutes.
How to understand?
Well, let's consider the demand for a Zhiguli.
What does it depend on?
It is clear that it depends on the price of Zhiguli.
But it also depends on the price and the brands of the similar class,
which are substitutes for Zhiguli.
I hope it is clear.
If foreign brands are cheaper,
we will most likely make a choice in favor of foreign brands,
while reducing the demand for Zhiguli.
The third factor is the price and quantity of additional goods.
What are the additional goods in relation to Zhiguli?
Well, gasoline, maintenance, garages, spare parts, and many other things.
And when I decide whether to buy Zhiguli or not,
I will think about the price of Zhiguli,
but also about the maintenance of Zhiguli,
that is, the price of additional goods.
The demand for Zhiguli depends on the price and quantity of additional goods.
The third factor is the income and distribution of income between different groups of consumers.
Well, what is obvious?
If our income is growing,
then we will most likely increase the demand for Zhiguli,
although not necessarily in other equal conditions.
The third factor is the habits and tastes of consumers.
It is also obvious that they affect the demand.
The number of consumers obviously affects the demand.
The more consumers live in our city,
the more demand for one or another good in this city.
In terms of climate conditions,
it is clear to everyone that in Africa the demand for fur will be small,
and in the North it will be a little more.
The expectations of consumers.
I will talk about expectations separately.
So, let's talk about demand factors in a little more detail.
But wait, I forgot one point.
Look again at all the demand factors.
How many are there?
I have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Eight demand factors.
And what do you think, what do you think?
What is the important factor,
very important, obviously, in terms of life,
which affects the demand?
I did not mention.
What factor is not mentioned?
Obviously, I did not say anything about the quality of the product.
But do not hurry.
Do not include quality in the number of demand factors.
That's why economists do not do this.
Because we are talking about the demand for a given product.
And the demand for a given product implies the demand for a product of a given quality.
That is, we initially consider the quality of the product to be set.
If the quality changes,
then we consider it as another product,
although a very close substitute.
In other words, the Zhiguli 10 and 12 models
are considered as different benefits in the microeconomy.
Moreover, even Zhiguli of different colors
are also considered as different benefits in the microeconomy.
Is it clear?
We consider the quality of the product to be initially set.
Therefore, it is not mentioned in the number of demand factors.
Now let's talk more specifically about the demand factors.
The first factor, I repeat, is the price of a given product.
Let's see how the price of a given product affects the demand for it.
It's very easy.
There is a so-called law of demand in the microeconomy.
Let's look at the next slide.
Here is its formulation.
The law of demand.
The lower the price of a given product,
the more customers want to purchase it
during a given period of time
and under other unchanged conditions.
The law of demand is reflected graphically.
Look at the graph.
Look, we put the quantity of the product along the x-axis.
I use the internationally accepted designation
of quantity.
It means Q.
And along the y-axis we put the price of a given product.
And what do we see?
Look carefully at the graph.
I think it's not difficult.
The lower the price of a product,
the more demand for it
under other unchanged conditions.
Just a small caveat.
You see, I drew the function of demand as a linear one.
In fact, it doesn't have to be linear.
It can be non-linear,
it can be like this, curved.
But it doesn't cancel the law of demand.
The linear function of demand is most often used for simplification.
We have seen how the price of a given product
is the first factor.
But there are seven other factors besides the price.
Let's talk about them.
Look at the next slide.
It says that the effect of all other factors on demand
is manifested in the shift of the demand curve
from right to left
when the demand increases
and from left to right when it decreases.
Look at the graph.
Let's assume that the demand function is initially set to D0.
Imagine that the income of consumers has increased.
Nothing else has changed.
What does this mean?
It means that at any possible price
people will want to buy this product more than before.
And the demand curve goes where?
To the right.
The opposite situation.
Let's assume that the income of consumers has decreased.
What will we encounter here?
The most important thing is that at any possible price
people will want to buy this product less than before.
And the demand curve shifts to the left and down.
What was the fourth factor?
The fourth factor is the income of consumers.
What is the fifth factor?
The fifth factor is the habits and tastes of consumers.
I think it's obvious.
Imagine this situation.
Russian consumers suddenly fell in love with Estonian products.
For example, sour cream.
What will this lead to?
That the demand for sour cream, for Estonian sour cream,
will decrease and the demand curve will shift to the left.
Look, this is what is important to keep in mind.
What I'm telling you now seems very simple conceptually.
But it's very important to learn how to translate words into the language of graphics.
I said that if Russians suddenly discovered
harmful properties of Estonian sour cream,
the demand for sour cream will decrease and the curve will shift to the left.
I really hope that over time Russians will figure it out
and will understand that Estonian sour cream is not so bad.
Moreover, it's very edible.
What will this lead to?
That the demand for sour cream will increase again at the same price.
And the demand curve will shift to the right.
So, we haven't talked about expectations yet.
What expectations are we talking about in the microeconomics?
First of all, expectations of the price of a product.
Imagine that consumers are waiting
for a sought-after product to become more expensive.
What will they do today?
Most likely, they will buy more products today.
There may be a sharp demand for products.
And the demand will increase, and the demand curve will shift to the right.
There are other expectations.
They are waiting for this product to become cheaper.
Why would they buy it today?
Today, the demand for it will decrease under other equal conditions,
and the demand curve will shift to the left.
By the way, some companies often use this in their advertising strategies.
As usual, Don Stroy is trying to lure customers.
They usually say that today the prices are so-so,
but from the first day of the next month, apartments will become more expensive.
What are the company managers trying to do?
They are trying to increase the demand for apartments today.
That is, to shift the demand curve to the right.
Okay.
Let's look at the second factor.
We haven't talked about it yet.
What was the second factor?
If you remember, the second factor was the price and the number of substitutes.
Let's see how the demand for imported cars changes the price of a Zhiguli.
Let's suppose that for one reason or another, imported cars became more expensive.
Look at the slide, please.
The left graph shows the demand for imported cars.
The initial price of cars was P1, and they wanted to buy Q1 imported cars.
Cars became more expensive, and the price became P2.
Accordingly, they want to buy less imported cars.
The demand fell to Q2.
But since imported cars are more expensive,
this means that consumers at any price of Zhiguli want to buy them more than before.
And the demand curve for Zhiguli shifted to the right.
We observed something similar right after the financial crisis of 1998.
Remember what happened there.
The ruble fell sharply.
As a result, the ruble prices for foreign cars increased.
For many consumers, foreign cars became inaccessible.
So they switched to Zhiguli.
And the autobus temporarily solved its problems with the ruble.
The demand for Zhiguli increased, and the demand curve shifted to the right.
Now let's talk about how the markets of additional goods interact with each other.
In relation to cars, additional goods are gasoline.
Let's assume that cars became more expensive.
What would this lead to?
Previously, the price of a car was P1, and they bought Q1 cars.
Now cars cost P2, and they buy Q2 cars.
But by buying fewer cars, we begin to spend less on gasoline,
and the demand curve for gasoline shifts to the left.
The demand for gasoline decreases.
Well, I think I have covered all the factors.
I have looked at them.
And to finish this question, I would like to make a very important remark.
Look at the next slide.
Economists distinguish between the concept of demand and the quantity of demand.
These concepts sound very similar, but they are different concepts.
Let's read.
If the change in the purchase of a particular product is influenced by the change in its price,
its own price, then the change in the quantity of demand is mentioned.
In this case, the demand curve does not shift, but we follow the demand curve.
Let's go back to the previous slide.
Cars, gasoline.
What happened to cars?
Cars became more expensive.
Now they are bought less.
Previously, at the price of P1, they bought Q1 cars.
Now, at the price of P2, they buy Q2 cars.
Why do they buy fewer cars?
Because they became more expensive.
In this case, we say that the quantity of demand on cars has changed.
And we follow the demand curve from bottom to top.
If the change in the purchase of a particular product is influenced by all other factors,
then the change in the demand itself is mentioned.
And here, the demand curve shifts.
Let's go back to the previous slide.
Why do they buy less gasoline?
Because cars became more expensive.
At the same price of gasoline, they start buying less.
Here, the demand curve shifts to the left, and we say that the demand on gasoline has decreased.
Not the quantity of demand, but the demand.
That's it. We have finished the first question.
Now let's talk about the second question.
The offer and its factors.
The definition of an offer is as simple as the definition of a demand.
Let's read.
An offer is the quantity of goods that all manufacturers can and want to produce and sell
during a given time and under certain conditions.
The same thing.
The demand is how much they want to buy, and the offer is how much they want to produce and sell.
Now let's look at the factors of the offer.
There are a lot of them here too.
The first factor is the price of the product.
The second factor is the profitability of the goods that are competitive to the goods in production.
I'm afraid it's not very clear, but we'll look at it in a specific example.
The third factor is not better, but the profitability of the goods that complement the goods in production.
We'll also look at it in an example.
The fourth factor is the costs of the manufacturers.
The fifth factor is the state taxes and subsidies.
The sixth factor is the number of manufacturers.
The seventh factor is the goal.
The eighth factor is the natural conditions.
The ninth factor is the expectations of the manufacturers.
Let's go on.
We've discussed the factors of demand before.
Now let's talk about the factors of the offer.
The first factor of the offer is the price of the product.
Here we have what economists call the law of the offer.
Here it is on the next slide.
The law of the offer.
The higher the price of a given product,
the more manufacturers want to sell it
during this time and under other unchangeable conditions.
You see, this law is opposed to the law of demand.
What did the law of demand sound like?
The lower the price, the more they want to buy.
What does the law of the offer sound like?
The higher the price, the more they want to sell.
What does the law of demand sound like?
Graphically, we have this law.
Again, on the x-axis, we put the quantity of the product.
But now it is not the quantity of demand, but the quantity of the offer.
And on the y-axis, again, the price of the product.
And what do we see?
The ascending function.
The higher the price of the product,
the more manufacturers want to produce and sell it.
Why is that?
Let's look at it with a simple conditional example.
Let's look at a completely conditional example.
Let's assume that there are only three oil fields in the world.
On each field, according to the natural conditions,
you can extract only one conditional barrel of oil.
No more.
We introduce it for the sake of simplicity.
Such a simplification.
But what is obvious?
Every manufacturer would like to sell their oil as expensive as possible.
Even for a million dollars.
But every manufacturer has some price that suits it minimally.
If the oil is cheaper,
it simply will not be engaged in this price.
And the difference in these minimum prices
is due to the differences in oil production costs at different oil fields.
So, we have three oil fields.
The first field is in the Middle East.
Let's assume that the minimum price that suits the Arabs
is, let's say, 5 dollars per barrel.
This is the minimum price that suits the Arabs.
The second oil field is located in Siberia.
There, the cost of production is higher.
And let's assume that the minimum price that suits the Russian firm
is 10 dollars per barrel.
I repeat, if the price is lower than 10 dollars per barrel,
I believe that the oil production becomes unprofitable
and the Russians stop producing oil.
And finally, the third oil field is located in Norway,
on the shelf of the North Sea.
The minimum price that suits the Norwegians is, let's say, 15 dollars per barrel.
I want to emphasize once again that at every oil field
you can only extract one barley per field.
Now let's reason.
Let's assume that the market price of oil
has fallen by less than 5 dollars per barrel.
How much oil will be extracted?
It is obvious that under such conditions, no one will extract oil.
And the supply of oil to the market will be zero.
And if the price reaches 5 dollars per barrel?
I repeat, 5 dollars per barrel is the minimum price that suits the Arabs.
It suits no one else, only them.
So, at the price of 5 dollars, how much oil will be supplied to the world market?
Only one barrel.
Good. And if the oil prices rise and the price will be 10 dollars per barrel?
We assume that the Arabs simply cannot extract more than one barrel.
But who will be involved?
The Siberians.
The Russian oil company will start extracting oil.
10 dollars per barrel is the minimum price that suits it.
So, how much oil will be supplied to the world market?
Already 2 barrels. The Arabs and the Russians.
And how much oil will be supplied to the world market?
2 barrels.
Good. And if the price reaches 15 dollars per barrel?
Who will be involved? The Norwegians.
And they are already extracting oil.
They extract their own barrel.
And the supply of oil to the world market reaches 3 barrels.
What have we got?
We can transfer this table to the graph.
Look.
The x-axis shows the quantity of oil.
The y-axis shows the price of the product.
So, at the price of 5 dollars per barrel, how much oil is extracted?
They offer 1 barrel to the world market.
At the price of 10 dollars per barrel, how much oil is extracted and offered?
2 barrels.
At the price of 15 dollars per barrel, how much oil is offered?
3 barrels.
Combining all these points, what have we got?
Dependency.
The quantity of oil offered to the world market.
At the price of oil.
So, what have we got?
The function of the supply of oil.
And we denote the supply with the letter S.
Why?
Supply.
There is a case when you ask a bad student for an exam.
You draw a function for him.
You write the letter S and ask him.
Is it a demand or a supply?
He thinks that the letter S means demand and says that it is a function of demand.
And he gets 2.
Not because of ignorance of English.
Because in English S is a supply.
And because of ignorance that the function of demand simply cannot behave like this.
The ascending function is a function of supply.
It corresponds to the law of supply.
The higher the price, the greater the quantity of supply.
Why is this function ascending?
Because with the price rising, the production of goods becomes profitable.
Where the costs for goods are higher.
In addition to the price, we have many other factors.
Let's talk about them.
Let's look at the next slide.
We read.
The influence of all other factors on the supply is manifested in the movement of the supply curve.
Right-down when the supply increases and left-up when it decreases.
Let's try to figure it out.
What does it mean that the supply has increased?
It means that at the same price, they want to offer more goods than before.
Let's say, before, at the price of $10 per barrel, how much was offered for sale?
2 barrels of oil.
And now, for some reason, they offer to sell at the same price.
How much?
Not 2, but 3.
And what happens?
The supply curve shifts to the right.
That is, when the supply increases, the supply curve shifts to the right-down.
And when the supply decreases, what does it mean?
It means that at the same price, they offer less goods than before.
Let's say, before, at the price of $10 per barrel, they offered to sell 2 barrels of oil.
And now, for some reason, they offer only 1 barrel.
And what happens?
The supply curve shifts to the left-up.
Once again.
When the supply increases, the supply curve shifts to the right-down.
When the supply decreases, the supply curve shifts to the left-up.
Let's see now why this can happen.
The fourth factor is the cost of the producers.
Let's discuss.
Let's suppose, for some reason, I don't know why,
the costs of all three fields increased by $5 per barrel.
In our example, by $5.
The next factor, the fifth one, the fifth factor is the state tax and subsidies.
How does it affect the offer?
Well, taxes are actually different.
Let's take those taxes that increase the costs of the producers.
So, the taxes are the same costs.
When we introduce a tax, the costs of the producers increase by a large amount.
The tax and the supply curve go up.
The supply curve decreases.
What is a subsidy?
A subsidy is a tax, on the contrary.
When the state doesn't take money, it gives it to the producers.
Taking into account the subsidies, the costs decrease.
And the supply curve goes down to the amount of subsidies.
The purpose and the natural conditions are not complicated.
Let's talk about the expectations of the producers.
About the expectations of the producers.
Remember, when we talked about demand, we also discussed expectations.
What were the expectations?
The expectations of the changes in the price of the goods.
Okay.
Let's say that the producers are all waiting for their goods to become more expensive.
How will they act today?
Most likely, they will hold on to the goods.
They won't rush to sell it.
And what will happen?
The supply will decrease and the curve will go up.
The simplest example.
You are going to sell your apartment.
You are waiting for the apartments to become more expensive.
Most likely, you won't rush to sell the apartment.
If everyone does this, the supply of apartments will decrease.
On the contrary, if everyone is waiting for the apartments to become cheaper,
what will the producers try to do?
They will try to sell their apartments as soon as possible.
And the supply of apartments will increase.
Here is an example.
Near the house where I live, a garage city has appeared since the beginning of time.
There is a rumor that a new elite house will be built in this place.
And what do we see?
There is an ad on every pillar that says, I will sell the garage.
People are waiting for the garages to be demolished, so they will become cheaper.
And they are trying to sell their garage.
The supply of garages is increasing.
Now let's look at the second and third factors.
You see the profitability of goods that are competitive to the production of these goods.
Let's talk about this factor.
Imagine two goods on the market, on the food market.
A carrot and, for example, a potato.
Suppose the carrot is more expensive.
How do you think this will affect the offer of a potato?
Just look.
To give the right answer, you need to stand on the position of the farmer-producer.
In no case on the position of the consumer.
We won't understand anything like that.
It is the position of the farmer.
What do farmers focus on?
On the profitability of one or another product.
The carrot is more expensive.
So the profitability of the carrot for the farmers has increased under other equal conditions.
What do the farmers answer?
They increase the offer of the carrot.
And in fact, look at the slide.
Previously, the carrot cost P1.
The market offered Q1 carrots.
Now the carrot costs P2.
And the market offers Q2 carrots.
So with the price increase, the farmers increase the offer of the carrot.
But the land is limited.
Remember, I started this lecture.
The needs are limitless, and the resources, including the land, are limited.
But the land is limited. What does this mean?
That if the farmers offer more carrots to the market,
they take the land from under the potatoes and take this land for the carrots.
What do we observe?
We observe that on the potato market, the offer of potatoes becomes less.
I repeat, the carrots produce more,
the land is taken from under the potatoes and given to the carrots.
So the land under the potatoes is less.
And at the same price, the offer of potatoes decreases.
Look at the graph on the right.
There, the curve of the potato offer shifts from position S0 to position S1.
This is a problem.
To better understand this, let's look at another example.
Think for yourself.
Let's model this situation.
Economists have become more expensive.
What will happen to the offer of tankers?
Economists are the same product as carrots, potatoes, or Zhiguli.
So if we draw the curve of the offer of economists,
what do we put on the x-axis?
Their quantity.
And on the y-axis, the price of the economist, his salary.
And we observe the rising curve.
How much did economists cost before?
P0?
How many people in such a situation chose the profession of an economist?
Q0?
And the labor market offered Q0 of economists at their price, i.e. at their salary.
Economists became more expensive.
Now, the price of an economist P1.
What do young people answer?
The majority of young people, under other equal conditions,
start choosing the profession of an economist.
And after some time, the number of offers of economists on the market increases
from Q0 to Q1.
This is the curve of the offer of economists.
These are economists.
And now let's look at the market of tankers.
My logic is very simple.
I will start with the following.
I will say that if a young person chose the profession of an economist,
he will not go to tankers.
And what do we observe?
At the same price of the labor of an economist, P0,
the number of offers of economists on the market will be less than before.
Before, the curve of the offer will go to the left.
And now let's think about what I suggest you think about.
Oil has become more expensive.
What will happen to the offer of natural gas?
Think about it.
Oil has become more expensive.
This will lead to the fact that at a higher price of oil,
it will be produced at the same oil fields that were previously unprofitable.
And the offer of oil will increase.
This is no longer an economist, this is oil.
The price of oil was P0,
so it was $10 per barrel.
They were mining oil for $2.
And at the price of P1, $15 per barrel, they began to mine for $3.
But very often, when oil is mined, natural gas is also mined.
So what will this lead to?
The offer of gas on the market will increase.
Look, gas is a good that complements oil production.
And here we see that the curve of the offer of gas will shift to the right.
At the same price, gas will be mined more simply because more oil is mined.
And to finish this question,
let's focus on a very important point.
Remember I told you that the concept of demand and the value of demand should be distinguished?
The concept of the offer and the value of the offer should also be distinguished.
Let's read.
If you look at the slide,
if the sale of a given product is influenced by the change in its price,
then the changes in the value of the offer are mentioned.
At the same time, there is a movement along the curve of the offer.
Look, please.
Why is oil mined more?
Because oil has become more expensive.
Therefore, we move along the curve of the offer from this point to this one.
The curve of the offer does not shift here.
Oil has become more expensive, the value of the offer has increased.
Let's read further.
If the change in the sale of a given product is influenced by all other factors,
then the changes in the value of the offer are mentioned.
At the same time, there is a shift along the curve of the offer.
Look at the right graph.
Oil has become more expensive, the value of the offer has increased.
Here we move along the curve.
But at the same time, at the same price of gas,
it is offered more to the market.
And we observe a shift along the curve of the offer.
In our example, it is moving up and down.
We have considered the second question.
Let's move on to the third question.
The third question is market balance.
What is required here?
So far, we have considered the demand and supply isolated from each other.
And now we have to connect the functions of demand and supply in one picture.
This is how it is done on the slide.
Two curves of demand and supply.
Let's discuss.
Let's assume that at the beginning the price was at the level of P1.
P1.
Look, what are we going to observe?
You see, the price is high.
At this price, the demand will be small.
What is it equal to on the graph?
Q1d.
You see?
At the price of P1, the demand is Q1d.
At such a high price, few people would want to buy this product.
And what do you say about the offer?
The price is high.
At such a price, many would be happy to produce and sell this product.
That is, the offer value at the price of P1 is Q1s.
So what do we observe?
At the price of P1, the offer value exceeds the demand value.
And on the market, we observe the commodity.
Manufacturers want to sell more goods than the consumers agree to buy at such a price.
I must say that in this model we are looking at the so-called completely competitive market.
What is a completely competitive market?
It is a market in which there are a lot of independent sellers and buyers.
No one separately controls the price.
The price on the market is set spontaneously, under the influence of the demand of thousands of buyers and the offer of hundreds of sellers.
But still, at the price of P1, when sellers cannot sell their goods, the price spontaneously begins to decrease.
Let's see now what happens if the price on the market is accidentally set to the level of P2.
What do we observe at the price of P2?
The price is low.
At such a price, many would be happy to buy this product.
And the demand value for the product is, look at the slide, Q2d.
But the price is low for manufacturers.
At such a price, very few manufacturers would like to produce and sell this product.
That is, at the price of P2, the product will be offered to the market.
Q2s.
What do we observe now?
They want to sell, they want to buy more goods than they want to sell.
What is the difference called?
Do you know this word?
Of course, it is a deficit.
A deficit arises on the market.
And the price of the product starts to rise.
And the next step, what do we observe?
Look carefully at the slide.
There is some price, P with an asterisk, at which the quantities of demand and supply coincide with each other.
This price is called an equivalent price on the market.
P with an asterisk is an equivalent price.
And the number of goods purchased and sold at this price is called an equivalent number.
Now let's see how the balance can change.
The next slide is called the shift of the balance.
Let's think.
Let's suppose, for some reason, maybe people's incomes have increased,
demand for goods has increased.
What do we observe as a result?
The demand curve shifts from D0 to D1.
But let's suppose, at the same time, the costs of the manufacturer increase.
What does this lead to?
That the supply of goods decreases, and the demand curve shifts to where?
To the left and to the right.
And what do we observe?
That the demand curve shifted to the right, and the supply curve shifted to the left.
And now these curves intersect at a different point.
What, of course, happens in this case?
The price of the goods necessarily increases.
Both factors, in this case, and the increase in demand and the decrease in supply,
pull the price towards the increase.
There was a price of P0, now there is a price of P1.
And what happens to the equal amount?
In my graph, Q0 is equal to Q1.
That is, the equal amount remains the same.
But this is not necessary.
Just imagine that the demand curve, the demand function,
shifted more to the right than the supply function to the left.
Can you see what happens?
In this case, the price will be even higher.
And the equal amount will increase.
Imagine the opposite situation.
When the supply curve shifted to the left more than the demand curve to the right.
What will we observe?
The price will increase even more.
But the equal amount will decrease.
Yes, we have looked at the third question.
The fourth question is quite a big one.
There are many practical applications of this theory.
Let's discuss at least a few of the simplest applications.
For example, in Russia, due to favorable weather conditions,
a record crop of grain was harvested this year.
Please, illustrate this situation graphically.
Look, I assume that the grain market in our country is completely competitive.
So, what will we have?
The amount of grain along the x-axis,
the price along the y-axis.
There are some basic initial functions of demand and supply,
I mark them as D0 and S0.
There is a certain equivalent price P0
and a certain equivalent amount Q0.
And now, the condition, I will repeat it again.
Due to favorable weather conditions,
a record crop of grain was harvested in Russia this year.
What will change in the graph? Think about it.
In fact, if a record crop of grain was harvested,
it means that the grain market is full.
The grain market?
It means that the supply of grain is increasing.
And when the supply of grain is increasing,
where does the curve of supply go?
Down and right.
And what do we see?
The price of grain starts to fall.
And will it be sold in the market?
More.
Please note that in this case,
only the curve of supply is shifting,
but not the curve of demand.
Because no factors affecting demand have changed here.
The market is just full of grain.
There is more grain.
The price of grain is falling.
And people buy more grain.
But we are moving here.
The curve of supply is shifting.
The curve of demand is not shifting.
We are moving along the curve of demand.
Due to the decrease in price,
consumers start buying more grain.
Let's continue the analysis of the situation.
Let's assume that under such conditions,
the Ministry of Agriculture
decides to buy additional grain
from the State Reserve.
What will happen in the graph?
Think about it.
It's not difficult.
Additional grain purchases
from the State Reserve.
But if this is done,
who will come to the market?
A new major buyer
in the face of the Ministry of Agriculture.
So now what is increasing?
Demand for grain.
And the curve of demand is shifting.
To the right.
To the D1 position.
What are the producers of the Ministry of Agriculture
trying to achieve?
They are trying to maintain the price.
So that the price does not fall below P0.
To support the farmers.
The other thing is that when the Ministry of Agriculture
really implemented such a policy,
the farmers had already sold their grain.
And the Ministry of Agriculture really supported the buyers
with its grain purchases.
Another example.
The economies of India and China
show rapid growth.
How will this affect
the situation in the world oil market?
Let's look at the world oil market.
What do we have here?
The amount of price.
There is a demand for oil in the world market.
There is an initial supply of oil.
There is a certain equilibrium price.
And there is an equilibrium amount.
What happens next?
The Indian and Chinese economies are growing rapidly.
How will this affect the world oil market?
Obviously,
the rapidly growing economies
need more oil.
As the necessary raw material.
So what is happening in the world market?
The curve of demand for oil is shifting to the right.
And we see that
oil prices are increasing.
But the equilibrium amount is also increasing.
If the curve of supply of oil has such an upward slope.
Another example.
The price of oil in the world market has increased.
How will this affect the currency market in Russia?
Please note that
the change of the world oil price has an adverse effect.
We are studying the change of the currency market in Russia.
What is being sold and bought in the currency market?
Foreign currency.
For example, American dollars.
So we will put the number of dollars along the x-axis.
The dollar is the same product as any other.
There is a demand for the dollar, there is its supply.
So along the x-axis is the number of dollars.
And along the y-axis
is the price of the dollar in rubles.
What is the price of the dollar?
The dollar exchange rate.
So what do we have?
The beginning of the exchange rate.
The exchange rate is the price of the dollar.
What do we have?
The initial demand for the dollar and the initial supply of the dollar.
Let's think about it.
Oil has become more expensive.
Russia exports oil.
So
the inflow of foreign currency, American dollars, has increased in the Russian market.
What will we give?
The supply of dollars is increasing.
And the curve of the supply of dollars
shifts to the right.
What happens to the exchange rate?
The dollar starts to get cheaper.
This is what is happening in Russia.
Because of the large inflow of dollars in the Russian market,
the dollar is getting cheaper.
Now let's assume that the Central Bank of Russia
does not want the dollar to get cheaper.
What should it do?
It wants the exchange rate to remain the same, P0.
What should the Central Bank do?
It should increase the demand for the dollar.
It starts to buy dollars.
What do we see?
On one hand, the supply of dollars is increasing.
On the other hand, the demand for dollars is increasing.
This demand for dollars can lead to the dollar price,
the dollar exchange rate, remaining the same.
Or maybe it will fall a little
if the demand for the Central Bank increases by a smaller amount.
Let's say it will be like this.
This is what we are seeing now.
To finish this question and this topic,
we need to understand that this model
describes various market situations well.
But this is actually no more than a tool, like a hammer.
And this tool should be able to be used.
And to correctly predict the consequences of the demand and supply changes
in the real market,
we need to understand that the functions of demand and supply
are not always so standard, so classical.
Look at this.
What a realistic view of the function of supply.
Demand and supply.
Sooner or later, the function of supply
will change vertically.
Look.
Remember, I assumed that we have only three oil fields
in the world market.
And let's assume that the price is set at $15 per barrel.
Remember our example?
And three barrels of oil are mined, sold and bought.
But the fourth oil field simply does not exist.
It does not exist.
So, the fourth barrel of oil will have nowhere to go
until new oil fields are opened.
And it turns out that the curve of supply becomes like this.
It changes vertically.
And if it is so,
then the growth of demand for oil will lead to
the curve of demand shifting to the right.
But in this situation,
what will grow?
Only the price of oil.
And the equal amount of oil in the world market will remain the same.
The same is true for the demand curve.
It may not be quite standard.
But here is the standard type of demand curve.
And if it is, God forbid, insulin,
what is the demand for insulin dependent on?
On the number of patients, right?
But the price is dependent on the weak.
And the price is dependent on the weak.
And if it is,
then the curve of demand for insulin
in a certain price range is close to the vertical one.
This is how it will be.
That is,
with the price increase,
insulin will be bought less.
It should be taken into account.
This is insulin,
a product that is not easy to replace.
And there is some product that is easy to replace,
that is easy to refuse.
For example,
beer of this brand.
Beer of this brand.
What will be the demand function for beer?
It is for this brand,
not for beer in general,
but for beer of this brand.
The product is very easy to replace.
That is, with a slight increase in the price for beer,
for this kind of beer,
consumers can easily switch
to another kind of beer
and the demand function will be very similar.
I am saying this
to repeat once again.
To better predict
the consequences of the change in demand and supply
in a particular market,
we need to look
at how real the results will be,
how the demand function and supply function will look like.
They are not always standard.
They can be close to vertical and close to horizontal.
I repeat once again.
The more detailed theory proposals
are presented in the text of the lecture.
You can read them.
Well,
we have finished the second topic.
Let's start with the new topic.
Production and costs.
Please look at the slide.
The questions of the topic.
Our first question is
the production function.
What is it?
First of all, the definition of production is very simple.
Production is any human activity
to convert limited resources,
all kinds of material, labor, natural, ready-made products.
So, what is the idea?
To produce something,
resources are needed.
And the production function
shows the connection
between what?
Between the number of resources used
and the maximum production volume
that can be achieved
if all available resources
are used in the most efficient way.
The simplest production function
for example.
A housewife is baking pies.
For an hour,
let's say,
she can bake
if she works normally,
does not idle,
but she has organized her work in the best way,
she can bake
10 pies.
So, if we
denote the number of housewife's work
by L, labor,
and the output by Q, quantity,
then the simple production function looks like this.
Q equals
10 times L.
I hope you can see
that this function shows
how the output changes
depending on the amount of labor
that the housewife uses.
On condition, I repeat,
that she has organized her work in the best way
and works with normal intensity.
This is the simplest production function.
Of course, more complex functions are used in economics.
Look, please.
The most common economic theory
uses a two-factor production function
that reflects the dependence of the output
on the number of labor and capital used.
Labor is denoted by L,
capital is denoted by Q.
Q equals
A multiplied by K in the degree of ,
multiplied by L in the degree of .
So, K and L are the number of labor and capital used.
I would like to clarify
that we measure labor in hours.
And under capital,
we do not understand the amount of money
invested in business,
but what is called in economic theory
physical capital,
that is, the means of production,
machines, equipment.
Thus, the amount of capital
we usually measure in machine hours.
And I repeat again,
A,  and  are already known parameters.
And if we know them,
then we just need to substitute
the number of labor and capital
that can be changed,
and we can get the corresponding volume of output.
I repeat again,
it is possible to achieve
that labor and capital are used
in the most rational way.
What do these parameters mean?
Let's start with parameter A.
Look, please.
Imagine that the quantities of capital and labor are given,
and parameter A changes.
What does this mean?
That with the same quantities of capital and labor,
we can get a larger volume of output.
So parameter A reflects the influence
of technical progress on production function.
What do the parameters  and  mean?
and  are the so-called
elasticity coefficients
of output of labor and capital.
What does this mean?
The  coefficient shows
how many percent the output changes
when the capital is changed by 1%.
The  coefficient shows
how many percent the output can be changed
when the labor is changed by 1%.
Knowing the production function,
we can measure the scale of the output.
Read the definition on the next slide.
The scale of the output shows
how many times the output increases
when all factors of production,
that is, all resources, are increased at the same time.
To produce something,
we need resources.
Let's say we use two factors,
labor and capital.
Let's assume that we increased
the amount of labor and capital by 2 times,
that is, we built a factory twice as large.
This means that we use twice as much capital,
we build twice as many machines,
and we use twice as much labor.
What will happen to production?
Production will increase, of course,
but not by 2 times.
There are three possible cases.
In the first case,
we increase the number of factors by 2 times,
and the output increases by 3 times.
In this case, we say
that there is an increasing scale of output.
In the second case,
we increase the output,
we increase all factors, excuse me,
by 1 time,
that is, labor and capital increased by 1 time,
by 2 times, in my example,
and the output increases by less than 1 time,
for example, by 1.5 times.
Then we say that there is a decreasing scale of output.
In the third case,
we increased both factors,
all factors increased by 1 time,
in my example, by 2 times,
and the output increased by 1 time,
by 2 times, too.
Then we say that there is a constant scale of output.
It plays a very important role
in determining the optimal size of the enterprise.
Let's say, Zhiguli.
They can be assembled in a small workshop.
Of course, they can.
AvtoVAZ, as a production complex,
in terms of labor and capital,
is supposed to be 100 times larger
than such a small workshop.
That is, it uses the production factors 100 times more.
And the output of AvtoVAZ,
at the same time, increases by 200 or 300 times.
What does this mean?
That it is more effective for AvtoVAZ
to assemble machines at a large factory
than in a small workshop.
So, if the return on scale increases,
we should increase the size of the enterprise.
Another example.
In Soviet times,
people were very fond of building giant enterprises,
including agriculture.
For example, they built giant pig farms
for thousands or even tens of thousands of cattle.
Not only did the entire ecology fly within a radius of 100 kilometers,
but what else was there?
Let's say, a giant pig farm
uses production factors
100 times more than a small farm.
And the production of meat
is, let's say, 10 times more.
What does this mean?
That a large enterprise in agriculture
is economically inefficient.
That is why small farms are quite effective in agriculture.
And when we increase the size of the enterprise,
we sooner or later come to a situation
where the increasing return on scale
is constantly changing, and then decreasing.
This means that we should not increase the size of the enterprise any further.
It is better to enjoy a larger number of enterprises, but smaller in size.
Knowing the production function,
we can always calculate the costs of the enterprise.
Here we come to the second question.
Economists divide costs into accounting and economic.
The definition of accounting costs, please look at the slide.
The accounting costs of a company
are the sum of its actual payments for the purchased resources.
The sum of the actual payments for the purchased resources.
This is very easy.
In order to produce something,
the company needs a wide variety of resources.
The company buys these resources.
And then the accountant
sums up all these payments for the purchased resources
and puts them into the account.
And then the accountant
sums up all these payments for the purchased resources
and puts them into the account.
Let's look at the simplest example.
Let's look at the simplest example of accounting costs.
Suppose the company uses equipment
worth 200 rubles and service life, let's say, 5 years.
Obviously, the whole cost of equipment
cannot be attributed to the expense of one year.
Amortization must be used.
When using the simplest linear amortization,
the expenses of one year will be attributed, respectively,
200 divided by 5, 40 rubles.
That is, the accountant makes his report.
Amortization is 40 rubles.
Next.
Suppose the company uses raw materials and materials
worth 80 rubles annually.
The accountant writes, raw materials 80.
And the company pays, let's assume, 60 rubles per year in salary.
The accountant writes, salary 60.
Now let's assume that the equipment was bought on credit
at 10% annual.
10% of 200 equipment costs are 20 rubles.
So, the percentage on credit annually will be 20 rubles.
The percentage on credit is another 20 rubles.
Let's assume that the company does not make any more payments.
But it does not make any administrative, transport expenses,
advertising, research, does not pay taxes related to cost.
None of this.
The accountant sums up all these payments and writes,
the sum of accounting expenses is 200 rubles.
The economist has a slightly different view.
Economic expenses are alternative expenses.
They represent the value of those benefits
that could be obtained with the most profitable
of all alternative ways of using limited resources.
I'm afraid it's not very clear, but it can be simpler.
In practical calculations, economic expenses include,
in addition to the obvious or accounting expenses,
also the unclear expenses.
We can write that economic expenses are equal to
accounting expenses plus some other unclear expenses.
What are accounting expenses?
I've already said.
It is not clear what are the unclear expenses.
Let's read.
The unclear expenses are the amount of unpaid income
of the company on its own resources.
We are talking about the income that the company management
could get using its resources,
not in this business, but in some other way.
Let's analyze this.
Imagine that you founded your own business.
Obviously, you came to this business with a lot of money.
What did you bring with you?
Perhaps, some amount of money capital.
Let's say, 100 rubles.
Could you use this capital alternatively?
Of course, you could.
What is the simplest alternative to use this money?
You could put it in the bank.
Then you would get a percentage.
If you invested this money in your own company,
you would lose this percentage.
And this unpaid percentage
would be included in the unclear expenses of the company.
Let's say, you invested 100 rubles in your business.
You had to close your bank account.
Therefore, you lost 10% of the invested money.
I suppose that the bank pays 10% of the investment.
So, what is included in the unclear expenses?
The unpaid percentage
of the investment in your own business.
You got this money for free.
But it doesn't mean that you shouldn't use it.
You invested 100 rubles,
lost 10% of the money
that you could have got if you kept this money in the bank.
And, accordingly, this unpaid percentage
of 10 rubles would be included in the unclear expenses.
Then, in order to start your own business,
you had to quit your job.
And you probably worked for a hire.
So, what did you lose?
The salary.
The unpaid salary
would also be included in the unclear expenses of the company.
Let's say, you earned 200 rubles by working for a hire.
You founded your own business,
and you lost this 200 rubles.
The economists include this 200 rubles of unpaid salary
in the unclear expenses of your company.
I write down
the unpaid salary.
Let's say, how much was there? 20 rubles.
The unpaid salary.
Another assumption.
Let's suppose that for the sake of your business
you turned your apartment into an office or a warehouse.
What did you lose in this case?
How to estimate your losses?
You could have rented this apartment.
By renting it, you could have received,
let's say,
another 20 rubles per year.
By giving this apartment to your business,
you lost this 20 rubles.
So, the unpaid salary
would also be included in the unclear expenses.
The unpaid salary is 20 rubles.
Well, that's good.
Summing up all these lost income,
we get
the unpaid expenses of the company.
They are
50 rubles.
It turns out
that the total economic expenses of the company
are 200 rubles of accounting expenses,
50 rubles of unpaid expenses,
and 250 rubles in total.
But now we need to answer the most important question.
Why do economists make up the original?
What did they come up with
in addition to the obvious or accounting expenses,
which are obvious to everyone,
some other unclear expenses,
which, I repeat,
the company does not even pay to anyone?
The unclear expenses are the income
that entrepreneurs lost
by investing their resources in the company,
which they provided to the company,
supposedly for free.
But why?
Without knowing the unclear expenses,
we cannot assess
how profitable this business is to entrepreneurs.
So, I have already said about the expenses.
Total economic expenses
amounted to 250 rubles.
But the company produces something.
And let's assume
that it produces, sells products,
and let's assume
that the annual revenue of the company
amounts to,
let's assume,
240 rubles.
The annual revenue is 240 rubles.
How will an accountant assess the situation?
An accountant only takes into account
the accounting expenses.
Not because he is so stupid,
but because an accountant
is guided by certain rules
of accounting.
So, an accountant will most likely
congratulate with a profit.
The annual revenue is 240 rubles.
The total accounting expenses are 200 rubles.
The profit is 40 rubles.
40 rubles.
And how will an economist assess the situation?
An economist will take into account the loss.
The loss of revenue
minus the economic expenses
amounts to minus 10.
The loss is 10 rubles.
What does it mean in the economist's mouth?
It's very simple.
Nobody will take you into this business.
If you didn't go into it,
how much money would you have in your wallet
at the end of the year?
You would keep your money in a bank,
you would have an annual interest of 10 rubles,
you would work for a hire,
you would have an annual salary of 20 rubles,
you would be able to rent an apartment,
you would receive an annual rent payment of 20 rubles,
you would have 50 rubles in your pocket
at the end of the year.
And how much would you have in your pocket at the end of the year?
Only 40 rubles of accounting revenue.
The revenue is 240,
accounting expenses are 200.
So, you have only 40 rubles in your pocket.
I don't take taxes, of course.
So, this business is simply not profitable for you
under such conditions.
And now let's summarize.
Let's look at the slide.
The difference between the revenue and accounting expenses
is the accounting profit of the company.
So, we calculated the revenue minus accounting expenses
is the accounting profit.
The difference between the revenue and economic expenses
is the economic profit
or the over-profit of the company.
So, it turned out that the economic profit
is the revenue minus the economic expenses.
And the third conclusion that we can make.
If the economic profit is negative,
the company is losing money,
the business is not profitable for the entrepreneurs,
no matter how big the accounting profit is.
And to finish this question,
I'll give you a few examples.
I'll give you the first example.
I came up with it.
Don't think that in our department
things really work this way.
Look.
I was offered to go on a business trip
to another city, let's say, for a week.
I know that during the week I will earn
100 rubles.
What is this 100 rubles
in my example?
100 rubles is my revenue.
This is what I get on a business trip.
But, as I have already reported,
I work in the Academy of Foreign Trade.
I have to conduct some classes for you every week.
I can't just leave like that.
If the classes are interrupted,
there will be a scandal.
What should I do?
I'll go to my colleague and say,
listen, I really need to leave.
Conduct classes for me.
But it's not convenient for me to ask him just like that.
So I'll tell him this.
Conduct classes instead of me,
I'll pay you 50 rubles.
In this case, there will be no scandal.
I'll pay you to conduct the classes.
And who will conduct it, that's the second question.
So I pay my colleagues
to go on a business trip without any problems
50 rubles.
What are these 50 rubles in our terms?
This is what I take out of my pocket
and pay my colleagues.
These are my accounting expenses.
Well, it would seem that everything is fine.
It is clearly necessary to go on a business trip.
After all, I will earn 100 rubles on a business trip,
and I will pay, I will bear the expense
to go on a business trip.
50 rubles.
So my accounting profit will be 50 rubles.
I don't take any other accounting expenses from a business trip.
But there is one nuance.
Because I'm going on a business trip,
I won't be able to read a lecture
on the MBA program.
No one will make me a profit here.
But I won't get a salary.
Let's assume that I get 60 rubles on the MBA program.
If I go on a business trip,
I won't get these 60 rubles.
Accordingly, 60 rubles
make up my unobvious travel expenses.
Thus, my total economic travel expenses
make up 110 rubles.
50 plus 60.
60.
And the revenue on a business trip is only 100.
It turns out that the economic profit on a business trip
is equal to minus 10.
It is not profitable to go on a business trip.
Another example.
Let's say you have a small cafe.
You decided to install a small arcade in the corner
to attract more visitors.
What are your obvious or accounting expenses for this project?
Obviously, the annual amortization of the arcade
and the cost of its annual maintenance.
And what are your unobvious expenses for the arcade?
I assume that you don't have a free place in the cafe.
Therefore, if you install an arcade in this corner,
you will have to remove the table.
Let's suppose.
Accordingly, the lost profit from the table
will be included in the unobvious expenses for the arcade.
You can't ignore the unobvious expenses.
Otherwise, you can't understand
how profitable or unprofitable it is for you to install an arcade.
One more example.
My friend was engaged in this business.
She is an intermediary between a mayonnaise factory and a retail store.
She took mayonnaise at the factory for implementation,
and then she built it into a retail store.
One day she had problems.
The container owner at the wholesale market refused to buy mayonnaise from her.
He explained that mayonnaise was sold slowly.
She came to me with a question,
Sergey Georgievich, what does it have to do with fast or slow?
She said, I don't take money from him.
I give him the mayonnaise for implementation.
If he sells it quickly, he will pay me quickly.
If he sells it slowly, he will pay me slowly.
What does she not understand?
She does not understand that the container owner has unobvious expenses.
What are they?
The container is not rubber.
If mayonnaise is in this corner,
there will not be, for example,
the same Estonian sour cream,
which is supposed to be sold faster.
So what happens?
The lost profit from the implementation of sour cream
will be included in the unobvious expenses for mayonnaise.
It turns out that an ordinary trader in the market,
having no idea about these scientific terms,
obvious and unobvious expenses,
cannot but take into account the unobvious expenses in his practical activity.
Let's start the third question of the topic.
The types of expenses.
All expenses, both accounting and economic,
can be divided into constant and variable.
What is the basis of such a division?
Look, let's say the company increases the production.
And it is clear that with the increase of production,
some expenses change,
and others remain unchanged.
Those expenses that do not change with the increase of production,
we call constant expenses.
And those expenses that change with the increase of production,
we call variable expenses.
Why are expenses generally divided into constant and variable?
Because we also divide the production factors into constant and variable.
The fact is that some production factors
can be easily and quickly changed
with the increase of production.
Let's say, it is easy enough for a company to hire new workers.
Workers are a variable factor of production.
But a company needs a certain amount of time
to acquire new equipment,
that is, to use additional capital.
Therefore, we usually take equipment
in the short term to the constant factor of production.
Look at the definition again on the slide.
Constant expenses are the expenses,
the amount of which does not change with the change of production.
That is, these are the expenses of the constant factors of production.
Amortization, rental fee, interest on credit,
salary of management are usually related to constant expenses.
Unclear expenses are also usually related to constant.
Now variable expenses again.
Variable expenses are the expenses,
the amount of which changes with the change of production.
That is, these are the expenses of the variable factors of production.
Usually, they include salary of production workers,
raw materials expenses,
electricity for technological purposes, and others.
So, constant expenses and variable expenses.
If we sum them up,
we get the total expenses.
Look at the slide.
Fc is the fixed cost.
Vc is the variable cost.
The total cost is TC.
The total expenses of the company.
It is also very important to know the expenses per unit of production,
or the average expenses.
Average constant expenses.
We denote them by the letter AFC.
Look at the slide.
These are the constant expenses per unit of production.
So it turns out that AFC is equal to
FC is the constant expenses divided by the volume of production Q.
Average variable expenses AVC.
These are the variable expenses per unit of production.
How to calculate them?
We divide the total amount of variable expenses by the volume of production.
Look at the formula.
And finally, the average total expenses.
These are the total expenses per unit of production.
How to calculate?
We can divide the total expenses, the total cost, TC,
by the volume of production Q.
Or we can calculate it in another way.
We can sum up the average constant and average variable expenses.
The marginal cost is a very important role in economic analysis.
The marginal costs are the addition of the total costs
when the volume of production is one unit.
Look at the formula.
MC is equal to delta TC divided by delta Q.
How to understand it?
Let's say you have already produced a certain number of units of production.
You want to produce one more additional unit of production.
To produce an additional unit of production,
you need to bear additional costs.
These additional costs required by the production of an additional unit of production
are the marginal costs.
But look, when do we increase the volume of production?
And when do we increase the total costs?
After all, the total costs are made up of constant and variable costs.
But only variable costs are increased.
Constant costs do not change in a short period of time.
So, the addition of the total costs is equal to the addition of the variable costs.
So, the marginal costs can be calculated by dividing delta VC,
the increase of the variable costs, by the delta of the production.
To better understand this, I will give an elementary example of calculation of costs.
Please look at the slide.
We have two volumes of production here, 10 and 11.
What are the constant costs?
All the time 50.
They do not change with the change in production,
by determining the constant costs.
And what are the changes?
The variables change.
Suppose at the time of production 10 they were equal to 100 rubles,
and at the time of production 11 they were 105 rubles.
All other parameters are easy to calculate.
What are the total costs equal to?
How much were they before, at the time of production 10?
50 plus 100, that is, 150.
Now they are at the time of production 11.
50 plus 105, 155.
How to calculate the average constant?
It is very easy. We divide the constant costs by the volume of the production.
50 divided by 10 is 5.
5 rubles of constant costs per unit of production at the time of production 10.
And at the time of production 11, how do we calculate?
50 divided by 11 is approximately 4.55.
These are the average constant costs at the new volume of production.